# 20231008204327 Video Note: 5 Signs You Have a Lone Wolf Personality, Not Just An Introvert

#Personality #LoneWolf

```
author: Psych2Go
location: Psych2Go <https://youtu.be/Rf-I7ua9FrU>
date: 2023-09-28
```

## What is a Lone Wolf Personality?

* It referes to people who enjoy time alone, don't mix well with crowds and
  value quality over quantity regarding relationships.
* Similar to introverts.
* Just becasue someone doesn't talk much or meld into the crowd, doesn't make
  them anti-social or unapproachable
* Introverted Outsiders

## 5 signs your're a Lone Wolf and not just an Introverts

* **You Prefer Independent Solitude**
  * Solitude is a choice when loneliness is a feeling that can persist even
    when other people are present.
* **Yor're Introspective and Aware**
  * Like introverts, Lone Wolves are prone to introspection and self-reflection.
  * They often use deep thinking to analyze their own thoughts, actions, and
    emotions. Allowing them to have better control of themselves.
  * They want to be keenly aware of who they are and "don't just look at the
    good". They look at the bad as well and actively try to improve themselves.
    They want to know their strengths and weaknesses and use them to their
    advantage in school and the workplace.
  * This active introspection allows them to constantly improve and see things
    in a new light, making them more confident and open-minded than most
    others. Take a page from The Lone Wolves book and take the time to think
    about how you can actively improve yourself.
* **You Think Outside of the Box**
  * Lone Wolves are often confident with their opinions and refuse to succumb
    to peer pressure.
  * What makes Lone Wolves special is that many experience fear of rejection
    but they will often still voice their opinions. They value inner voice and
    want to be heard. If you want to be heard, it's time to speak up. There's
    nothing wrong with expressing yourself.
* **You're a Good, Observent Listener**
  * Observing and listening while the world keeps spinning.
* **You Value Quality Over Quantity**
  * They like carefully selecting members of their pack.
  * They choose to build intimate connections versus superficial affiliations
    and often do not hesitate to drop anyone who proves toxic or fake.
