# 20240114063148 Video Note: Cargo Cult Agile

#Agile #Scrum #CargoCult

```
author: Agile Coach
title: BEWARE of Cargo Cult Agile! (SHOCKING REASON why it's inevitable..)
location: <https://youtu.be/GW3YdJdlxW0>
date: 2022-03-26
```

## 13 Sign that You're Using Cargo Cult Agile Mentality

 1. Stakeholders decide what to tship, what to build, another Product Owner (PO)
 2. Deadlines fixed. Delivery dates are provided by Top Management on year prior
 3. Prodcut Owner is not talking to customers
 4. Product Owner spends most of the time writing stories instead of doing more valuable things
 5. Doubtful value of the products no one knows, Why we are building these products. As example: Some stakeholders management, they want to push products maybe for bonuses
 6. There's a dedicated Scrum Team for minor change requests and bug fixing
 7. Stakeholders on never or rarely attending Scrum Events
 8. Developers don't participate in User Story creation
 9. Sprint Backlogs are orfter changed in the middle of a sprint just because we missed something or something more important cropped up
10. We do Sprint Retrospectives but often very often nothing changes
11. Deadlines and fixed schedules are still used for non-critical issues
12. The Teams are not cross-functional. So they are dependent on other Teams and other people in the organization
13. Daily Scrum Meetings that look a lot like Status Meetings where people in the meeting (developers) feel compelled to show that they are working. So they talk 5 or 6 minutes, giving their updates to a Product Owner or Scrum Master, like they are reporting to these people. They feel compelled to talk just to show that they are working. In the worst part, this thing lasts 45 minutes because everyone is talking for 6 minutes and no one is working prior to the Daily Scrum because context switching. Let's not work because we know there will be context switching. And after for 45 minutes or 1 hour Daily Scrum, it's already time for lunch. So, why start working? Now, let's start working out after the lunch.

If you get "yes" more than 8-9 times for those above 13 questions/statements, maybe you're in the Cargo Cult Agile. Renaming the Waterfall into Agile won't make them Agile.
