# 20240314023456 Arch Linux: How to Change External Monitor Backlight?

#ArchLinux

I use external monitor for my daily work as Back End Software Engineer. Sometimes, I wake up at midnight and want to learn something new.

The light from monitor sometimes too bright at night, I need to adjust the screen brightness via monitor built-in software.

I found snippet information from Arch Linux Wiki about how to adjust external monitor screen brightness. [^1]

Install `ddcutil` package via Pacman.

```terminal
$ sudo pacman -S ddcutil
```

Kernel module named `i2c-dev` need to load manually.

```terminal
$ sudo modprobe i2c-dev
```

> If those `i2c-dev` not loaded on kernel module, we get the error like below when run the `ddcutil` command.
> 
> ```
> No /dev/i2c devices exist.
> ddcutil requires module i2c-dev.
> ```
> Check those kernel module loaded or not with command,
> ```terminal
> $ lsmod | grep "i2c_dev"
> i2c_dev                28672  0
> ```
> If there is no output, it means those kernel module not loaded.

After make sure the `i2c-dev` kernel module has loaded, let's run the main command to adjust external monitor brightness.

First, make sure there is capabilities to set brightness feature.

```terminal
$ sudo ddcutil capabilities | grep "Feature: 10"
```

```
  Feature: 10 (Brightness)
```

Nice! We have capabilities to adjust brightness. As we can see, the `10` is the feature number.

Second, get the brightness current value and max value of the Feature number `10` with `getvcp` command.

```terminal
$ sudo ddcutil getvcp 10
```

```
VCP code 0x10 (Brightness                    ): current value =    80, max value =   100
```

Last, to set the brightness of external monitor with `setvcp` command.

```terminal
$ sudo ddcutil setvcp 10 50
```

The `10` is vcp code of Brightness feature.

The `50` is value of brightness that I want to set.


[^1]: [Arch Linux Wiki: _Backlight: 1.3 External Monitors_](https://wiki.archlinux.org/title/Backlight#External_monitors)
